Let $\mathfrak{g}$ be a Lie algebra. Consider a series of subspaces $\mathfrak{g}_k$ constructed recursively by $\mathfrak{g}_1=[\mathfrak{g},\mathfrak{g}]$, $\mathfrak{g}_{k+1} = [\mathfrak{g}_k,\mathfrak{g}]$. In other words, $\mathfrak{g}_k$ is spanned by $(k+1)$-ple commutators $[\xi_{k+1},[\xi_k,\dots[\xi_2,\xi_1]]]$. Each $\mathfrak{g}_k$ is an ideal in $\mathfrak{g}$ and this is a descending chain.

A Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ is **nilpotent** if there is a $k\in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\mathfrak{g}_k=\{0\}$. Otherwise, then there is a $k$ such that $g_k=g_{k+1}=g_{k+2}=\cdots$ and $\mathfrak{g}_k\neq \{0\}$. Equivalently, nilpotence means that there is a $k$ such that for any $\xi_1,\dots\xi_k\in \mathfrak{g}$, $\ad_{\xi_1}\ad_{\xi_2}\cdots\ad_{\xi_k}=0$. Note nilpotency is preserved when taking subalgebras.

Example:
- The Lie algebra of strictly upper triangular matrices $\mathfrak{t}_n'$ is nilpotent, with $\mathfrak{g}_{n-2}\neq\{0\}$ but $\mathfrak{g}_{n-1}=\{0\}$
- Any commutative algebra is trivially nilpotent
- The Heisenberg algebra $\mathfrak{h}_n$ is defined as a $(2n+1)$-dimensional algebra with a basis $p_1,\dots,p_n,q_1,\dots,q_n,e$ satisfying $[p_i,q_i]=e$ and all other commutators are trivial. In invariant terms, this Lie algebra $\mathfrak{h}_n$ is the direct sum $V\oplus \mathbb{R}e$ of a symplectic space $V$ and one-dimensional space generated by a certain vector $e$. For any two elements $\xi,\eta\in V$, $[\xi,\eta]\coloneqq = \omega(\xi,\eta)e$ and $[\xi,e]=0$. In terms of nilpotency, $[\mathfrak{h}_n,\mathfrak{h}_n] = \mathbb{R}e$ and $(\mathfrak{h}_n)_2 = \{0\}$.

Consider a series of subspaces $\mathfrak{g}^{(k)}$ constructed recursively by $\mathfrak{g}^{(1)} = [\mathfrak{g},\mathfrak{g}]$, $\mathfrak{g}^{(k+1)} = [\mathfrak{g}^{(k)},\mathfrak{g}^{(k)}]$. Each $\mathfrak{g}^{(k)}$ is an ideal in $\mathfrak{g}$ and this is a descending chain. We have $\mathfrak{g}^{(k)}\subseteq\mathfrak{g}_k$.

A Lie algebra is **solvable** if there is a $k\in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\mathfrak{g}^{(k)}=\{0\}$. In particular, every nilpotent Lie algebra is solvable.

Example:
- The Lie algebra of upper triangular matrices $\mathfrak{t}_n$ is solvable but not nilpotent. Note $\mathfrak{t}_n^{(1)} = \mathfrak{t}_n'$
- Up to isomorphism, there are only two Lie algebras of dimension 2. One of them is commutative. The other is defined by the commutator relation $[e,f]=f$, and is solvable but not nilpotent.

A representation $\phi\colon g\to \End V$ is **nilpotent** if for any element $\xi\in\mathfrak{g}$, the operator $\phi(\xi)\colon V\to V$ is nilpotent, i.e. $\phi(\xi)^k=0$ for some $k$. If $\mathfrak{g}$ is nilpotent, then its adjoint representation is nilpotent.

Theorem (Engel):
Let $\phi\colon g\to \End V$ be a nilpotent representation. Then there exists $0\neq v_0\in V$ such that $\phi(\xi)v_0=0$ for any $\xi\in \mathfrak{g}$ (i.e. $v_0$ is a common eigenvector for all elements $\xi\in \mathfrak{g}$ with zero eigenvalue).

The proof is tricky.

Example:
- The natural representation (i.e. use matrix multiplication) of $\mathfrak{t}_n'$ on $\mathbb{R}^n$ is nilpotent. The common eigenvector is $e_1=(1,0\dots,0)\tran$
- The adjoint representation of $\mathfrak{t}_n'$ is also nilpotent. The common eigenvector is $E_{1n}=\begin{pmatrix}0&\cdots&0&1\\0&\ddots&&0\\ \vdots&&\ddots&\vdots\\0&\cdots&0&0\end{pmatrix}$

Corollary:
Let $\phi\colon \mathfrak{g}\to \End V$ be a nilpotent representation. Then there exists a basis $e_1,\dots,e_n$ in $V$ such that the matrices of $\phi(\xi)$ are all strictly upper triangular.

Corollary:
$\mathfrak{g}$ is nilpotent if and only if its adjoint representation $\ad$ is nilpotent

Corollary:
If $\mathfrak{g}$ is nilpotent then its centre $Z(\mathfrak{g})$ is not trivial

Example:
- The natural representation of the Lie algebra of diagonal matrices $\mathfrak{d}_n$ is not nilpotent, but $\mathfrak{d}_n$ is commutative and hence nilpotent.
- Let $\mathfrak{g}=\left\{ \begin{pmatrix}a&c\\0&b\end{pmatrix}: a,b,c\in \mathbb{R} \right\}$. This algebra is not nilpotent but $\begin{pmatrix}a&c\\0&b\end{pmatrix}\mapsto\begin{pmatrix}0&a+b\\0&0\end{pmatrix}$ defines a two-dimensional nilpotent representation of $\mathfrak{g}$. Notice that this representation is not faithful, however (see the following proposition)

Proposition:
If $\rho\colon g\to \End V$ is faithful and nilpotent, then $\mathfrak{g}$ is nilpotent.

Theorem (Lie):
Let $\mathfrak{g}$ be a solvable Lie algebra over $\mathbb{C}$ and $\phi\colon \mathfrak{g}\to \End V$ be its linear representation (on a complex vector space $V$). Then there is a vector $0\neq v\in V$ such that for all $\xi\in \mathfrak{g}$ we have $\phi(\xi)v=\lambda v$ where $\lambda = \lambda(\xi)\in \mathbb{C}$. In other words, $v$ is a common eigenvector for all $\xi\in \mathfrak{g}$.

Note $\lambda\colon \mathfrak{g}\to \mathbb{C}$ is a linear function on $\mathfrak{g}$, and $\lambda([\xi_1,\xi_2]) = 0$ for any $\xi_1,\xi_2$, so $\lambda$ is a Lie algebra homomorphism (with $\mathbb{C}$ being a commutative Lie algebra of dimension 1). We needed to use $\mathbb{C}$ since there are linear operators over $\mathbb{R}$ with no eignevectors at all.

Corollary:
Under the assumptions of the Lie theorem, there is a basis $e_1,\dots,e_n$ in $V$ such that the matrices of $\phi(\xi)$ are all upper triangular with $\lambda_i(\xi)$ on the diagonal.

Corollary:
If $\mathfrak{g}\subseteq\gl(n,\mathbb{C})$ is a solvable matrix Lie algebra (over $\mathbb{C}$), then $\mathfrak{g}$ isomorphic and even conjugate to a certain subalgebra of the upper triangular Lie algebra.

Corollary:
A Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ is solvable if and only if $\mathfrak{g}^{(1)}$ is nilpotent.