Let $H,G$ be connected Lie groups and $\mathfrak{h},\mathfrak{g}$ be the corresponding Lie algebras. A path connected topological space $X$ is **simply connected** if for any closed curve $\gamma\colon S^1\to X$ there exists a continuous map $\Gamma\colon D^2\to X$ such that $\left. \Gamma \right|_{\partial D^2}$ is $\gamma$. E.g. $\SO(n)$ is not simply connected for $n\geq 2$.

Theorem:
Let $\phi\colon \mathfrak{h}\to \mathfrak{g}$ be a Lie algebra homomorphism. If $H$ is simply connected, then there exists a unique homomorphism $\Phi\colon H\to G$ such that $\phi=d\Phi$. Without simply connectedness, we don't have existence, but uniqueness still holds if such a $\Phi$ exists.

Example:
Let $H$ be a complex unit circle $H=\{z\in \mathbb{C}\mid z=e^{i\alpha}\}$ and $G$ be the set of positive real numbers under multiplication $G = \{x\in \mathbb{R} \mid x = e^\beta\}$. $\mathfrak{h}$ can be identified with the imaginary axis $i\mathbb{R}$ and $\mathfrak{g}$ with the real line $\mathbb{R}$. We have a homomorphism $\mathfrak{h}\to \mathfrak{g}$, $i\alpha\mapsto \alpha$, but we can't construct a non-trivial homomorphism $H\to G$. Locally, it is fine, but we have the global obstruction of $H$ not being simply connected.

Proof of theorem:
Uniqueness is proved by noting that any $\Phi$ satisfies the following commutative diagram (as in previous lecture):
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd, amsmath, amssymb}\begin{document}\begin{tikzcd}[every label/.append style={font=\small}]
\mathfrak{h}\dar["\exp"']\rar["\phi=d\Phi"] & \mathfrak{g}\dar["\exp"]\\
H\rar["\Phi"'] & G
\end{tikzcd}\end{document}
```
So, locally, we can reconstruct $\Phi(h)=\exp{}\circ\phi\circ\exp^{-1}(h)$ in a small neighbourhood of $e$ (since we can invert $\exp$ in such a neighbourhood). $H$ is generated by this neighbourhood and so the global result follows since $H$ is connected.

For existence, we let $\Phi\colon H\to G$ be a homomorphism and $\Phi(x)=y$. We want to describe the differential of $\Phi$ at $x$ by means of $\phi=\left. d\Phi \right|_{e}$. Any tangent vector in $T_xH$ can be obtained by left translation from a certain vector $\xi\in\mathfrak{h}$, i.e. is $dL_x(\xi)$. Then the following diagram commutes:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd, amsmath, amssymb}\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[every label/.append style={font=\small}]
\mathfrak{h}\rar["\phi=\left. d\Phi \right|_{e}"]\dar["dL_x"'] & \mathfrak{g}\dar["dL_y"]\\
T_xH\rar["\left. d\Phi \right|_{x}"'] & T_yG
\end{tikzcd}\rlap{$\qquad(*)$}\end{document}
```
This is true by differentiating the commutative diagram (from the homomorphism property)
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd, amsmath, amssymb}\begin{document}\begin{tikzcd}[every label/.append style={font=\small}]
H\rar["\Phi"]\dar["L_x"'] & G\dar["L_y"]\\
H\rar["\Phi"'] & G
\end{tikzcd}\end{document}
```

Now let $\gamma(t)$ be a smooth path in $H$ connecting $e$ with $x$. Choose $\xi(t)\in \mathfrak{h}$ such that $\gamma'(t)=dL_{\gamma(t)}\xi(t)$. The relation $\frac{dh}{dt}=dL_h\xi(t)$ is a non-autonomous ODE on $H$. In particular, the (unique) solution of this equation starting at $e$ is exactly our initial curve $\gamma(t)$. Notice that all other solutions are of the form $h(t)=a\gamma(t)$. $\Phi(\gamma(t))$ is the solution of $\frac{dg}{dt}=dL_g\phi(\xi(t))$, a non-autonomous ODE on $G$, since $d\Phi(\gamma'(t)) = \Phi(\gamma(t))'$ and by $(*)$.

So now if we know $\phi\colon \mathfrak{h}\to \mathfrak{g}$, we can uniquely reconstruct $\Phi(x)$ for any $x\in\mathfrak{h}$ that can be connected with $e$ by a smooth path. We need to check that this doesn't depend on the path chosen, but that is by simply connectedness. Also need to check that $\Phi$ is a homomorphism. Let $\gamma_1(t), \gamma_2(t)$ be some paths connected $e\in H$ with $x_1,x_2$ respectively. Then the concatenation of $\gamma_1(t)$ and $x_1\cdot\gamma_2(t)$ is a path to $x_1x_2$. Denote by $y_1,y_2$ the images of $x_1,x_2$ obtained by continuation of $\Phi$ along the curves. Since $y_1\cdot\Phi(\gamma_2(t))$ and $x_1\cdot\gamma_2(t)$ satisfy the ODEs, their endpoints are the same, which is the desired property.

Finally, the map $\Phi$ obtained by continuation of $\phi$ along a curve is smooth since in a small neighbourhood of $e$ it is smooth (as $\exp{}\circ\phi\circ\exp^{-1}$) and this can be extended by the homogeneity principle: ${} \Phi = L_{\Phi(x)}\circ\Phi\circ L_{x^{-1}} {}$. $\blacksquare$