$G$ is a connected Lie group, and $\mathfrak{g} = T_eG$ is its Lie algebra.

Proposition:
Let $H\subseteq G$ be a Lie subgroup. Then the tangent space $\mathfrak{h}=T_e H\subseteq\mathfrak{g}$ is a Lie subalgebra.

Conversely, does an abstract subalgebra $\mathfrak{h}\subseteq\mathfrak{g}$ correspond to a subgroup $H\subseteq G$. The answer is yes, but the subgroup is not necessarily a Lie subgroup. For example, let $G=T^2$ be a two-dimensional torus endowed with the standard structure of a commutative Lie group with angles $\phi_1,\phi_2$ defined modulo $2\pi$. Consider the one-dimensional subspace in $\mathfrak{g}$ spanned by $\xi_0=(a,b)$. This is a subalgebra in $\mathfrak{g}$. The corresponding subgroup is $\exp(t\xi_0) = (at,bt)$. If $a/b$ is rational, then this subgroup is closed and hence a Lie subgroup. If $a/b$ is not rational, then this subgroup represents the irrational winding on ${} T^2 {}$ which can be considered as an immersion $f\colon \mathbb{R}\to T^2$ but not an embedding. Nevertheless, this is a subgroup, but only locally a submanifold. We call this a **virtual Lie subgroup**. Returning to the proposition's converse, for any $\mathfrak{h}\subseteq\mathfrak{g}$ there is a unique connected (possibly virtual) Lie subgroup $H\subseteq G$ with $T_eH=\mathfrak{h}$.

A subgroup $H\subseteq G$ is **normal** if $gHg^{-1}=H$ for any $g\in G$. A Lie subalgebra $\mathfrak{h}\subseteq\mathfrak{g}$ is an **ideal** if $[\xi,\mathfrak{h}]\subseteq\mathfrak{h}$ for any $\xi\in\mathfrak{g}$.

Proposition:
Let $H\subseteq G$ be a connected Lie (possibly virtual) subgroup and $\mathfrak{h}\subseteq\mathfrak{g}$ the coresponding Lie subalgebra. Then $H$ is normal if and only if $\mathfrak{h}$ is an ideal.

Proof:
$(\implies):$ $\exp(t\xi)H\exp(-t\xi)=H$ implies $\Ad_{\exp(t\xi)}\mathfrak{h}=\mathfrak{h}$. Then differentiate and set $t=0$ to show $[\xi,\mathfrak{h}]\subseteq\mathfrak{h}$.
$(\impliedby)$ is harder is we now have to integrate. Fix $\xi\in\mathfrak{g}$ and consider the family of linear operators $\Ad_{\exp(t\xi)}$ on $\mathfrak{g}$. This family is a one-parameter subgroup, so it naturally defines a vector field on $\mathfrak{g}$, $\zeta(\eta) = \left.\frac{d}{dt}\right|_{t=0}\Ad_{\exp(t\xi)}(\eta)=[\xi,\eta]$. In particular, $\Ad_{\exp(t\xi)}(\eta)$ is exactly the integral curve of this vector field passing through $\eta$. $\mathfrak{h}$ being an ideal means that this vector field is tangent to $\mathfrak{h}$ at each point, so its integral curves lie in $\mathfrak{h}$. Therefore $\Ad_{\exp(t\xi)}\mathfrak{h}=\mathfrak{h}$ since it is a linear isomorphism. Next, using $g\exp(s\eta)g^{-1}=\exp(s\Ad_g\eta)$, we conclude that ${} \exp(t\xi)\exp(s\eta)\exp(-t\xi)=\exp(s\Ad_{\exp(t\xi)}\eta)\in H {}$ for any $\xi\in\mathfrak{g}, \eta\in\mathfrak{h}$. Elements of the form $\exp(t\xi)$ generate $G$ and those of the form $\exp(s\eta)$ generate $H$, so $gHg^{-1}=H\ \forall g\in G$. $\blacksquare$

Example:
Consider the Lie algebra $\mathfrak{t}$ of upper triangular $n\times n$ matrices, and let $\mathfrak{h}$ be the subalgebra of matrices with non-zero elements only in the last column. The corresponding connected groups are $T$ being upper triangular matrices with positive diagonal elements, and $H$ being matrices with non-zero elements in the last column and $1$s along the diagonal, except the bottom-right element can be any positive number. In fact, $\mathfrak{h}\subseteq \mathfrak{t}$ is an ideal and $H\subseteq T$ is a subgroup.

The **commutant of $G$** is a subgroup $G'\subseteq G$ generated by all commutators (i.e. elements of the form $aba^{-1}b^{-1}$). The **commutant of $\mathfrak{g}$** is a subalgebra $\mathfrak{g}'\subseteq g$ generated by all commutators (i.e. elements of the form $[\xi,\eta]$).

Proposition:
- $G'$ is a normal connected Lie (possibly virtual) subgroup. The quotient group $G/G'$ is commutative and $G'$ is the smallest subgroup with this property
- $\mathfrak{g}'$ is an ideal. The quotient Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}/\mathfrak{g}'$ is commutative and $\mathfrak{g}'$ is the smallest ideal with this property
- $\mathfrak{g}' = T_eG'$

Corollary:
A connected Lie group is commutative if and only if its Lie algebra is commutative.

A Lie group homomorphism is a smooth map which is a homomorphism. A homomorphism of Lie algebras is a linear map which preserves the Lie bracket.

Theorem:
If $\Phi\colon H\to G$ is a homomorphism of Lie groups then its differential $d\Phi\colon \mathfrak{h}\to \mathfrak{g}$ is a homomorphism of Lie algebras.

Lemma:
Let $\eta\in \mathfrak{h}$ and $\exp t\eta$ be the corresponding one-parameter subgroup in $H$. Then $\Phi(\exp t\eta) = \exp(td\Phi(\eta))$.

Proof:
Both sides are one-parameter subgroups with the same initial vector.

Lemma:
$d\Phi(\Ad_h\eta) = \Ad_{\Phi(h)}d\Phi(\eta)$

Proof:
Differentiate $\Phi(h\cdot\exp t\eta \cdot h^{-1}) = \Phi(h)\exp(t\cdot d\Phi(\eta))\Phi(h)^{-1}$.

Proof of theorem:
Differentiate $d\Phi(\Ad_{\exp(t\eta_1)}\eta_2) = \Ad_{\Phi(\exp(t\eta_1))}d\Phi(\eta_2) = \Ad_{\exp(t\cdot d\Phi(\eta_1))} d\Phi(\eta_2)$. $\blacksquare$